## Linux lecture notes
# Lesson 1
Introduction to Linux: Linux is a Unix-like computer operating system assembled under the model of free and open source software development and distribution. The defining component of Linux is the Linux kernel, an operating system kernel first released 5 October 1991 by Linus Torvalds. Linux was originally developed as a free operating system for Intel x86-based personal computers. It has since been ported to more computer hardware platforms than any other operating system. It is a leading operating system on servers and other big iron systems such as mainframe computers and supercomputers more than 90% of today's 500 fastest supercomputers run some variant of Linux, including the 10 fastest. Linux also runs on embedded systems (devices where the operating system is typically built into the firmware and highly tailored to the system) such as mobile phones, tablet computers, network routers, televisions and video game consoles; the Android system in wide use on mobile devices is built on the Linux kernel. Basic Features Following are some of the important features of Linux Operating System. • Portable - Portability means software‘s can works on different types of hardware‘s in same way. Linux kernel and application programs support their installation on any kind of hardware platform. • Open Source - Linux source code is freely available and it is community based development project. Multiple Teams works in collaboration to enhance the capability of Linux operating system and it is continuously evolving. • Multi-User - Linux is a multiuser system means multiple users can access system resources like memory/ ram/ application programs at same time. • Multiprogramming - Linux is a multiprogramming system means multiple applications can run at same time. • Hierarchical File System - Linux provides a standard file structure in which system 3 files/ user files are arranged. • Shell - Linux provides a special interpreter program which can be used to execute commands of the operating system. It can be used to do various types of operations, call application programs etc. • Security - Linux provides user security using authentication features like password protection/ controlled access to specific files/ encryption of data. Linux Advantages 1.Low cost: You don‘t need to spend time and money to obtain licenses since Linux and much of its software come with the GNU General Public License. You can start to work immediately without worrying that your software may stop working anytime because the free trial version expires. Additionally, there are large repositories from which you can freely download high quality software for almost any task you can think of. 2.Stability: Linux doesn‘t need to be rebooted periodically to maintain performance levels. It doesn‘t freeze up or slow down over time due to memory leaks and such. Continuous up- times of hundreds of days (up to a year or more) are not uncommon. 3.Performance: Linux provides persistent high performance on workstations and on networks. It can handle unusually large numbers of users simultaneously, and can make old computers sufficiently responsive to be useful again. 4.Network friendliness: Linux was developed by a group of programmers over the Internet and has therefore strong support for network functionality; client and server systems can be easily set up on any computer running Linux. It can perform tasks such as network backups faster and more reliably than alternative systems. 5.Flexibility: Linux can be used for high performance server applications, desktop applications, and embedded systems. You can save disk space by only installing the components needed for a particular use. You can restrict the use of specific computers by installing for example only selected office applications instead of the whole suite. 6.Compatibility: It runs all common UNIX software packages and can process all common file formats. 7.Choice: The large number of Linux distributions gives you a choice. Each distribution is developed and supported by a different organization. You can pick the one you like best; the 4 core functionalities are the same; most software runs on most distributions. 8.Fast and easy installation: Most Linux distributions come with user-friendly installation and setup programs. Popular Linux distributions come with tools that make installation of additional software very user friendly as well. 9. Full use of hard disk: Linux continues work well even when the hard disk is almost full. 10. Multi-tasking: Linux is designed to do many things at the same time; e.g., a large printing job in the background won‘t slow down your other work. 11.Security: Linux is one of the most secure operating systems. ―Walls‖ and flexible file access permission systems prevent access by unwanted visitors or viruses. Linux users have to option to select and safely download software, free of charge, from online repositories containing thousands of high quality packages. No purchase transactions requiring credit card numbers or other sensitive personal information are necessary. 12.Open Source: If you develop software that requires knowledge or modification of the operating system code, LINUX‘s source code is at your fingertips. Most Linux applications are Open Source as well.
